hey everyone losland montgomery here
china history podcast episode 257
seems like number 256 was only two weeks
ago
hey listen don't be shy join in on all
the excitement at
history podcast sign up monthly cost is
less than the price of a
frozen chicken balti at sainsbury's
three bucks
two pounds thirty early access to chp
episodes racy content that would
never be accepted in polite society
patreon.com
china history podcast i thank you in
advance
in the powers vested in me as proprietor
of this joint
well you know from time to time i'd like
to introduce the occasional westerner
who had
some nexus in their life with some of
the history that went on in china
westerners in china and some of the
achievements they had in their
careers well this always
had particular interest to me i have no
idea why
today's subject emily mickey han
i believe if you're my generation or the
one before
and you've been a long time reader of
the new yorker magazine
you might have heard of her and for
everyone who has never heard of emily
hahn
please allow me to introduce her to you
quite a character
i didn't have her listed on my most
updated list of
topics it was actually one of my
listeners of
uh my youtube channel luchon boone
who recommended emily hahn so i figured
if there was one listener
who's interested in emily hahn's story
surely there's another
thousand or so earlier in the year
i did a three-part series on kawashima
yoshiko
i don't want to compare the two women
except to say their behavior
and manner in which they mixed in
society
it turned a lot of heads they both had a
great love of lesser apes
gibbons in particular they were both
constantly seen around town with their
pet gibbons on their shoulder was a
crucial part of their particular
zaniness yoshiko
was two years younger than emily i'm
sure emily han
knew of yoshiko or was at least aware of
her whether or not these two women ever
party together or met in public can't
say
emily hahn perhaps not too well known in
our day but when she was cranking out
the essays
articles novels history books and
whatnot
especially during the decades following
the 1930s
she was one of the most widely read
women of her time
she was as much known for her wild and
crazy antics
scandalous personal life and
unconventional lifestyle as she was for
her
unique style of writing she was born in
saint louis missouri
january 14 1905 the final years of the
qing dynasty
the poor old guanxi emperor teddy
roosevelt in the usa
whether it's genetic or how you were
raised
some people love to read and some don't
emily hahn like most all writers
loved to read and got the bug early she
grew up in a family of eight
her parents were german jewish
immigrants
she had one brother and four sisters
although i'll refer to her mostly as
emily
she was known throughout her life as
mickey that was a nickname her mother
gave her
i guess she had some resemblance to an
old cartoon character mickey dooley
during emily's second year of high
school the family moved to chicago
my hometown and emily attended send high
school
located a mere 10 minutes away from the
hospital i was born at
well i wanted to focus this episode on
the years she lived in china and hong
kong and her role as one of the
mansplainers of china to a nation of
citizens
newly cognizant of this place and hungry
to learn more
her dispatches from china and hong kong
were many a common american's window to
what was going on there
so before we get to the point where in
1935 her vessel sailed to shanghai and
her china adventure began
let's quickly look at some of the events
of her twenties that sort of
molded her into what she became for the
remainder of her very long life
she studied mining engineering at the
university of wisconsin
in idyllic madison she had to fight to
get in because back in the early 1920s
engineering was sort of an old boy's
profession and not considered a
suitable or even appropriate profession
for a woman
1924 she became the first woman to
graduate from the engineering school
there
ford was making model t's between 1908
and 1927.
emily and one of her more adventurous
friends
drove a model t cross country this was
in the spring in 1924
before she graduated and she wrote
letters from the road and mailed them to
her brother
her letters were always keepers she had
a way with words
and her brother recognizing this
forwarded some of these letters to the
new yorker
a relatively new publication back then
with degree in hand 1926
she put it to good use at pennzoil
taking on a job in st
louis mid-june 1926
but like a lot of us who aspire to
certain professions and then find
that's not what they thought it'd be
that's how emily felt about the mining
biz
her friend dorothy who had taken that
transcontinental road trip with her got
her job out in albuquerque as a tour
guide
from there she went to taos new mexico
then
a haven for artsy fartsy
spiritual individuals who embraced a
bohemian lifestyle
which by now i guess described emily
hahn
mid-1920s if there was ever a time when
women in america were consolidating the
incremental gains of the late 19th and
early 20th centuries
this was it many women began to
spread their wings and gave some of
these hard-fought freedoms a
test drive in january 1928
emily went back to school and began grad
studies at columbia
she moved into a small hotel room above
times square and earned some income
teaching geology on the side
two mornings a week at hunter college
for women
she studied and worked during these lead
up years to the stock market crash on
black friday
1929 so with a degree from columbia
in hand emily hahn had to wrestle with
what to do with her life especially now
that the united states economy had just
been turned on its head one day a friend
asked emily to write a piece for her
that she couldn't take care of due to
other commitments
it was for the sunday world when emily
wrote the article
got published and she earned 25 bucks
for her efforts and that
was the start of her professional
writing career
remember how emily had written travel
letters from the road
19 years old crossing the country in a
model t
well her brother or maybe it was her
brother-in-law
sent those letters to the new yorker
co-founder harold ross
this was in 1928-29
and he was so impressed with emily's
writing one after the other he published
these stories in his respected magazine
and emily mickey han well she was given
quite a platform to express herself
and she had a lot to say and over the
next 70 years
and she got everything off her chest
after a pretty
short but destructive period in her life
she ended up sailing for england
from there she went to brussels and fell
in with this
congolese guy and then after some spark
ignited
a keen interest in africa she ended up
going back to london
but dreamed of the congo she kept her
head above water through a combination
of income earned from
the new yorker for her regular articles
and the kindness of strangers
then as it happens she took an offer
that was too good to pass up with the
red cross
in the middle of nowhere in northwest
congo
she departed from london on christmas
day 1930.
january 5th she made it to dakar and
january 19th to the mouth of the congo
river
followed by a 14-hour overnight train to
kinshasa
she ultimately hooked up with dr patrick
putnam near lake kivu
right on the border of the drc in rwanda
and she ended up staying there for the
next 20 months
and it was there that she developed this
lifelong fascination
and love for primates and an addiction
to fun and adventure
two years in the congo early 1930s
it was surely a life-changing experience
and
after it was all over it proved to be
excellent training for all the
challenges that
lie ahead at the end of 1932 she headed
to the east coast to dar es salaam
congo had been quite an eye-opening
experience for emily
but she still hadn't found what she was
looking for
january 1933 she returned to london
fluent in swahili in fact once in a uh
soho bar she overheard some chaps
speaking in swahili
so she chatted them up and one of them
happened to be a young jomo kenyatta
future first president of kenya and
father to the current president of kenya
uhuru kenyatta
she struck up a long lasting friendship
with jomo kenyatta
a few weeks afterward emily returned to
new york and tried to regroup
and figure out what to do she moved up
to woodstock new york to take a job
and then in june of 1933 a book of her
african journals
congo solo my misadventures two degrees
north
came out throughout emily han's career
she had a lot of literary hits and
misses
then at the age of 28 emily hahn wasn't
doing
too bad three books published already
steady income from the new yorker
she was already very well traveled and
quite educated next up for emily hahn
was an affair
with a married hollywood screenwriter as
we'll see she
sort of had a thing for married men
in the spring of 1934 she headed out to
la to be with him and the relationship
progressed and
she accompanied him to london and got
all settled there
she studied anthropology at oxford and
continued her writing already she was
acquiring quite a reputation as the
go-to writer for anyone uh not too
offended with sex and
interracial love early 1935 she made it
back to the states
restless as ever searching this
hollywood writer turned out to be not
the one for emily hahn
after a bit of soul-searching she
decided she'd do another stint in the
congo
belgian congo back then later zaire
and today the democratic republic of
congo
after consulting with her sister helen
they came up with a plan
to head to the far east first spent some
time there and then
helen would head back to the state
sometime around mid-june and emily would
keep heading in the direction of congo
and so
emily han's china story began march
1935 she and helen left san francisco
and sailed to shanghai via yokohama
by late april of that year emily hahn
had done
quite well for herself and fell in with
a 24-carat crowd
chief among them sir victor sassoon
over the years she would become very
close to him
among other passions sir victor sassoon
was quite a
photographer and even got emily to pose
nude for him
they didn't become friendly just because
they were a couple of jews but
eh that probably didn't hurt yeah if she
was
uh hanging out with guys like victor
sassoon you can imagine all the other
swells she rubbed elbows with at
all the lounges and clubs and private
soirees and gatherings
she felt right at home amongst this
crowd and though she wasn't for
everyone's tastes
she was very much in demand well
i guess unless you were destitute what
wasn't there to like about shanghai
during that time
it was one stop shopping for fun glamour
culture sin excitement and a big old
blast of
cosmopolitanism especially when walking
the streets of the international
settlement
and french concession those days
1920s and into the 30s shanghai
was hard to beat and many say the same
thing in
2020 after acquiring an instant
addiction to everything shanghai had to
offer
emily put her africa plans on hold she
moved into a flat on jiangxi road in the
middle of
what was then the red light district and
in no time at all her place became a
kind of
salon for all kinds of intellectuals
artists officials leftists and
many from the criminal fringe who
embraced this lifestyle
and soon afterwards she was hired by the
leading english language paper at the
time
the north china daily news this job
allowed all kinds of doors to open
and gave emily access to many great
snare greats and also rans who made up
shanghai society
if he could say anything about emily
hahn she was a social creature
not shy and always perked up whatever
party or event she was attending
everyone knew she was bosom buddies with
victor sassoon so that in itself led to
acceptance that
well otherwise might not have been there
not long after getting settled and
acclimated to her new home for the next
few years
emily met shaoxin may not a
well-known name but in his day he was
sort of a character
who everyone knew about and his poetry
and
writing had earned him a modicum of
admiration
he came from serious money lived in a
gigantic house
with an extended family and lived an
extremely privileged
life including years studying in europe
in his late teens and
attending cambridge in his twenties
there
xiaoshin may developed his lifelong
passion for
western literature and culture and most
english sources
he's known as zao sin may he was a year
younger than emily
they met at one of these risque
get-togethers where foreign and chinese
intellectuals would gather and enjoy
some witty conversation
i guess you could say emily hahn was
predisposed to do crazy
daring and unconventional things today
no one thinks twice about it but in the
mid 1930s
western women openly engaging in an
intimate relationship with a chinese man
no one didn't stare at that and very few
didn't have strong opinions
especially when one of the mixed couples
was
already married with children
nonetheless they fell for each other
shaoxin mei's shtick was that he
preferred to dress always in traditional
chinese robes and garments
he was one good-looking chap too
even lucian had commented once in one of
his writings about
uh sinmei's handsome looks and shanghai
society was
plenty shocked at how openly emily
carried on this relationship
she didn't care who saw them together
xiao shin may
took her to his home introduced her to
his wife and family
and then sinmei introduced her to the
evils of the opium pipe
and well like it's been known to happen
with narcotic drugs
she developed a nice healthy addiction
and for the next couple years she found
herself
waking and baking regularly however like
many addicts and alcoholics are capable
of doing
she was able to carry on her daily life
and new career
as well as keep up with a regular
submission of articles for the new
yorker
in september 1935 emily bought a monkey
a gibbon she knew it was a gibbon
because some man named mr mills
had told her so and so she named her pet
mr mills
and she took this animal wherever she
went as i mentioned
just like kawashima yoshiko and to
ensure mr mills was never lonely
she added other gibbons to her
collection and predictably they took
over her place and were
always escaping out the window and
creating trouble with the neighbors
so 1935 1936 and into the terrible year
of 1937
emily got to revel in the last days of
old shanghai
hanging out and partying with victor
sassoon and his glitzy crowd
getting high all the time writing for
the north china daily news and
all her dispatches to the new yorker
and the witty vignettes about life all
around her were
wildly popular and she created this
fictional character named panhaven who
was loosely based on the character of
xiaoshinmei
and she had more or less moved in with
his family and
got to be a kind of fly on the wall
observing up close
all the gears and mechanisms that drove
the shaw family
she used a lot of these observations in
her popular
ponhevan stories that new yorker readers
couldn't get enough of
and sinmei's family had given her a
chinese name xiang mei li
she still maintained her flat on jiangxi
road that had
long become the late night hangout joint
for
shaoxin may and all his retinue of
friends and
hangers on and there were quite a few
communists as well who were laying low
in these
post shanghai massacre days joanne lai
had mixed with emily once or twice and
allegedly mao zedong as well and all the
action that went on in her living room
in this part of shanghai's red light
district
provided endless fodder for fascinating
pieces that she submitted regularly to
the new yorker
and by this time emily han mostly known
as mickey han
she had become the sole lifeline for
many american intellectuals and readers
of the new yorker
who were interested to know about china
and about all the ominous news that they
occasionally heard about back then
wasn't
like now where everybody's practically a
journalist the income from her writing
covered her nut as far as her opium
supply and all the daily necessities of
life
but by and large emily was highly
dependent on the
generosity of friends and others who
picked up the tab at the end of the
night
and like her lover xiaoshin may she too
became a local character who everyone
knew by sight and many notable persons
passing
through shanghai had at least heard of
her
during the autumn of 1935 she quit her
gig at the north china daily news
and started teaching english at some
college
this work made much less demands on her
life and allowed her to
more fully enjoy her daily opium pipes
emily kept on pushing the envelope as
far as
lifestyle excesses went she was always
game for anything
dangerous liaisons included and though
jewish herself
emily han didn't mix or get too involved
with the jewish refugees who were
starting to when their way to shanghai
she wasn't part of all that drama august
to november
1937 were four months to remember in
shanghai
all the good times that emily han and
others had enjoyed up till now came to a
crashing end
emily moved into a flat inside the
international settlement to escape the
worst of the bombing and destruction of
the
battle of shanghai not long after she
moved again to the
french concession and then on november
8th 1937
after putting up a valiant defense the
nationalist army
abandoned shanghai to its fate as far as
emily's relationship with xiao xin may
or sinmei or she called him that started
to feel some strain
like a lot of the chinese gentry of
shanghai the shao's lost
everything and were borderline destitute
slumming it in some
cottage not far from emily's flat in the
french concession
sin may propose they get married
polygamy was
legal still and under chinese law sinmay
could take a second wife
the marriage wouldn't be recognized
under american law
this essentially made emily a concubine
but she decided to go along with the
whole thing under these new
circumstances
her marriage to a chinese national
yielded some benefits that
might come in handy one day and in fact
did
and so all the proper documents were
signed
sealed and delivered you can't say the
tongue started wagging because emily and
sinmei's relationship was well known in
expat communities
inside and outside shanghai a famous
american journalist
making no effort to conceal her
relationship with a married chinese man
with mr mills and these other primates
who lived with her
and did i mention she liked a good cigar
and that was another one of her
famous eccentricities as far as her
opium habit
she had the same battle cry as all
addicts i can stop whenever i want to
yeah easier said than don not that your
humble narrator ever partook after
hitting that pipe as regularly as she
had
a couple years now emily and it wasn't
looking too good
the addiction was taking its toll on not
only her health but
her appearance as well but like a
walking drunk she kept on keeping on
churning out pieces for the new yorker
and penning novels and
works of non-fiction and then one day
a captain charles boxer walked into her
life
he was quite an extraordinary man in his
own right
boxer was head of british army
intelligence based in hong kong
he had heard about emily was rather
intrigued and
came up to shanghai for a look-see the
timing wasn't the best and between
sinmei the monkeys and all the people
that popped in and out of
emily's daily life well boxer left with
less than a favorable impression but
despite that there was some
kind of mutual attraction
and he definitely was interested to see
her again
then came april of 1938 emily was still
making a living teaching english when
the noted journalist and author john
gunther came
calling gunther had suggested to her
that she write a book about the three
song sisters isling ching ling
and mayling emily wasn't initially
keen on the idea but with a number of
publishers showing interest in the
potential book
clamoring to get her to sign with them
well she knew oh this one had potential
her last book had bombed and she was
just
barely getting by on the new yorker
articles and the income from teaching
cinema may have been down and out but he
still had excellent connections about
town
he was able to get to a relative who was
close to song eileen who was able to
convince her
to meet with emily to discuss the book
idea
ching ling never responded to emily's
request to interview
and let me say sun yat-sen's widow and
knew
all about emily and her antics and
reputation around shanghai and she never
liked her nor had anything to do with
her
and was dead set against letting her
into the secret
song world seong mei ling madam jiang
kaishak
well she had responded to emily's
inquiries but had politely
turned her down eileen the oldest and
many say the most brilliant of the three
amazing sisters
she was mulling the whole idea over
about a
positive portrayal of her and her
sisters by a
popular and well-known american writer
june 1939 emily went and visited song
eileen at a hotel in hong kong
emily learned the song sisters were not
at all pleased with the press they had
been given and thought
they had been smeared and passed books
written about them
eileen was anxious to get something
positive written about them to counter
all the negative
and that's when emily had been
introduced to her and that's why song
isling convinced her
sisters well mei ling at least to offer
emily
access and cooperation the following
month she was back in shanghai with sin
may
whilst in hong kong she had hooked up
with charles boxer again and they had a
pleasant meeting
emily hahn had to do some serious
thinking she now had this book
opportunity
and she had to do something about the 12
times a day she was hitting that opium
pipe
aside from seriously hurting herself
physically and mentally
not to mention her chances of ever
getting pregnant should
she desire that well the nationalist
government had recently instituted
very harsh and draconian laws against
addicts
so in the late summer in 1939
she finally took serious action checked
into a drug rehab clinic and
kicked that wicked habit again not that
i ever personally experienced it but
i heard coming down off a year's long
opium habit
isn't easy or pleasant but emily was
determined and she was able to put that
behind her
and she looked at sinmei still
hopelessly addicted and for many more
years than she had been
and she saw him for what he had become a
hopeless drug addict
with this wind in her sails feeling
renewed from finally getting this other
monkey off her back
emily end of 1939
set out for hong kong to get working on
the song sister's book
once in hong kong song ai ling had
arranged for a flight to the now wartime
capital of china in chongqing
there emily was able to meet the
youngest sister meling
at the presidential compound you know
there was a
funny story that happened when emily was
sitting with the first lady of china
her husband jiankai shak wandered into
the room
unaware mei ling had a guest and he
waltzed in wearing
his slippers no false teeth in and not
appearing like you would normally see
him in a photograph
and he saw emily sitting there and
quickly you know turned heels and
excused himself
no doubt wondering what the hell was
that western person in his living room
talking to his wife emily
and seong mei ling got on famously
after all the ground rules were
meticulously laid out by madame chiang
they went right at it and a series of
interviews followed
emily's 10 weeks or so in chongqing were
fun filled with plenty of action
a lot of people especially in the expat
community
knew who she was and sought her out
there were also plenty of bombing raids
and
close calls chongqing was the wartime
capital of china
and the japanese bombed the place
mercilessly
and then the following year mid to late
february 1940
she hitched a ride with all three song
sisters and flew back to hong kong which
after all the death destruction and
stressful living of chongqing
was a veritable breath of fresh air and
then in april the three
famous sisters in a show of unity and
patriotism
flew back together to chongqing ailing
dragged emily along where she enjoyed
carte blanche to all kinds of
interesting and
historic things happening in the
meantime
a fire had been lit under her
relationship with charles boxer
each time they met it was easy for both
of them to
tell that there was something happening
between them
back in chongqing it was daily air raids
with one close call when
emily's hotel got hit and her room was
destroyed with the song sister's
manuscript
inside fortunately someone had been able
to retrieve it when digging through the
rubble
she remained in chongqing finishing up
the song sister's book and having a
blast
partying with the expat community there
the summer in 1940
emily found herself in the company of
song mei ling quite regularly
and fortunately the book manuscript had
met with the first lady's approval
and by late july the book was finished
emily then thought that wouldn't be such
a bad idea to
head back to hong kong and then make her
way back to america after these seven
years in china
with that in mind she went back to hong
kong and then
at once she began seeing charles boxer
and their relationship became
more open and obvious just as the
tongues wagged when she was
openly carrying on a relationship with
sin may so they were again with emily
having an obvious relationship with the
still married charles boxer charles had
convinced emily to put her plans to
return to america on hold
and that she should go send for her
monkeys and stay with him in hong kong
he'd divorce his wife marry her and
they'd have a kid
and by early 1941 sure enough emily was
pregnant
everyone in hong kong society had
something to say about that
when she met with ernest hemingway who
was in town staying at the repulse bay
he had told emily he'd be more than
willing to say that the kid was his in
order to
divert attention from her relationship
with charles boxer
despite the scandalousness of the
pregnancy neither emily nor charles
cared to do a thing to hide the affair
his wife wasn't giving in to the divorce
idea but as soon as she got word of
emily's pregnancy well as it is in most
cases of infidelity
that did the trick and then in the
spring of 1941 the song's sister's book
was published
this was her first great success
it was commercially successful and the
timing for a book like this
couldn't have been more perfect emily
had done well in
making a name for herself as the new
yorker's china coast correspondent
but the song sisters book took her to
the next level
this book ended up being the window to
china that americans were
thirsting for at that time 1941 wasn't
like today with some new china-related
book being published every day it seems
there wasn't much available on the
subject of modern china
and people across the states depended on
emily to be their eyes and ears in that
part of the world
she was already well known but with this
book
she had really arrived she lived up on
may road in the mid-levels with mr mills
and two other gibbons shipped down from
shanghai
and so they wouldn't be lonely she
purchased three more in hong
kong emily appeared in public quite
visibly pregnant this was the summer of
1941 and there was a
terrible feeling of dread amongst the
people there about
what was about to happen china had been
enduring four years of horror at the
hands of the japanese
and now it seemed it wasn't long before
hong kong would get a taste of that as
well
emily's due date was in october and on
the 17th of that month
corolla militia boxer was born
emily had managed to survive the
bombings that went on during the battle
of shanghai
and much more are the same when she was
in chongqing
now for the third time it was looking
like more war
was heading in her direction and in
december
following the attack on pearl harbor and
elsewhere in asia
the greater east asia co-prosperity
sphere
descended on hong kong and for the next
couple years
emily was among the many foreigners who
couldn't get out in time
that was pretty bad in itself but with a
two-month-old baby to care for
well that took the whole drama to a
different level
you surely remember from that
award-winning 10-part chp history of
hong kong series
the heroism and bravery exhibited by the
british
canadian indian troops and defending
hong
kong was valiant but at this early stage
of the war
there was no stopping japan emily did
her best to try and be useful
and helped out the nurses at war
memorial hospital
where 51 years later my daughter would
be born and after december 8th
darkness fell upon hong kong and
elsewhere
by christmas 1941 it was all over
and in the fighting charles had been
shot and was
ailing in a hospital despite the risks
well you know how love is emily tracked
down charles and
hardly ever left his side nursing him
and attending to his needs for as long
as the japanese allowed
but in the end she had to go back and
take care of their newborn and
leave charles to his fate let me mention
one important thing about charles boxer
quite an interesting chap besides his
illicit love affair with emily hahn
he was fluent in japanese and a scholar
of history and
literature i guess you could call him a
japanophile
as a gaijin learning that language how
can you not be
he practiced kendo and other japanese
martial arts
he didn't live strictly by any code of
bushido but
during his years in captivity although
he suffered greatly
the japanese seemed to have some kind of
begrudging respect for him and because
of this
it probably allowed both himself and
emily and their baby
to survive the ordeal january 1942 after
a period of
relatively comfortable limbo the
foreigners were rounded up and put into
camps
again this may have been because of the
secret admiration the japanese had for
charles boxer
maybe not but emily was able to take
advantage of a loophole in the
regulations regarding nationality
according to chinese law the wife
took on the husband's nationality in the
case of marriage
back in 1937 when she became sinmei's
second wife
or concubine well she had signed a legal
document to testing to the union
it was worthless in an american court
but
for whatever reasons the japanese
authorities
gave her a pass and she didn't get
interned with all the other foreigners
as far as the japanese saw her she was a
chinese national
well you could say she dodged a bullet
by not having to deal with the
unpleasantness of the internment camps
but on the other hand
well she was mostly on her own now with
an infant on her knee
and often trigger-happy japanese
soldiers around every corner
her chinese servant aking well
let me just say throughout this period
he had been instrumental in
emily's daily survival
during the horrible year of 1942
emily visited charles in his hospital
ward every day
she had to beg borrow or steal to get
whatever food she could for herself
and charles book royalties
were pouring into her bank account but
the japanese had frozen all banking and
she couldn't get access to
anything so to make ends meet and
curry favor for the sake of charles
emily agreed to
daily english lessons for some japanese
officers
they paid her with food rations that
meant
life and death for her and charles
throughout this period
her one particular benefactor was takio
oda
without his support emily and her baby
corolla
probably would have perished in the
internment camps
trying to get her hands on milk powder
for her baby was
always an ordeal and after spending the
first couple years of her life under
such conditions
baby corolla was malnourished and
undersized for her age emily didn't
know this of course but family and
colleagues back in the states
were trying furiously to arrange for her
and corolla to be
included in one of the many prisoner
swaps that were arranged
usually through the red cross her sister
helen had been
working constantly to get emily released
in the fall of 1942 one of these
exchanges was arranged
but emily refused to leave charles aside
and it wasn't just charles with emily on
the outside like she was
she was able to scrounge for
all kinds of food and other items and
turd prisoners were
desperate for she didn't collaborate
with the japanese and whatever they
tried to get
out of her wasn't of any use but she was
able to
cleverly leverage this special
relationship or whatever you want to
call it with the japanese authorities
to get them to look the other way when
she was
obviously providing help and sustenance
to certain internees
and then end of 1942 for the first time
allied warplanes started appearing in
the skies above hong kong
although the japanese did their best to
hide any sign that they were faltering
these were clear indications that
something was happening
and also during this time emily lost
poor old mr mills her pet gibbon
those two had gone through quite a lot
together
in time charles was released from the
hospital and transferred to the argyle
street internment camp for
officers and for charles and other
officers locked up inside with them
emily became their lifeline bringing
them whatever scraps of food she could
purchased from the black market with
funds she earned from
doing odd jobs early 1943
things changed around now
the tide was clearly turning and the
impending doom
felt by some in japan caused a complete
change in attitude towards prisoners and
internees
as you recall from that hong kong
history series one of the things the
japanese did was to empty out hong kong
of as
many residents as possible this meant
less mouths to feed and people to manage
hundreds and hundreds of thousands of
hong kong people were
forced to march north into guangdong
province to fend for themselves or
live off their relatives emily's
benefactor takeo oda
he ended up getting transferred out of
hong kong but his successor continued to
keep an eye out for her and had told her
to lay low because she was
being watched constantly and there were
those who were certain she was an allied
spy
and one of the other changes was that
her access to charles was now
severely restricted to the point where
it was near impossible to see him
they were only able to exchange
occasional messages
charles strongly urged her to get out
while she could
leave hong kong head to america and
after the war he'd find his way there
and they'd finally get married
she was able to see charles one last
time
he was in deplorable shape and from the
looks of it
might not last that much longer so when
she said goodbye when she didn't know
she'd ever see him again and on
september 23rd
1943 her red cross vessel carried her
and corolla away on the first leg of
their journey back to new york her
eight-year
china adventure was coming to a close
on november 30th of that same year she
arrived in new york
and after an unpleasant greeting from
suspicious fbi interrogators
emily and corolla were able to reunite
with her sister helen
who had not seen her since 1935 when
helen's boat sailed from shanghai back
to the u.s
well we're running way long already and
i don't want to split this one up into
two parts allow me to do a patented chp
rush to the finish once emily returned
to the u.s
over the next two months she
regurgitated
everything that she had experienced and
recalled over the course of her ordeal
and all manners of articles interviews
and
short stories were published and the
perfect timing of the song sisters book
was repeated again with the memoir of
her experiences
this book was entitled china to me
aside from offering a lot of insight
into
japan's actions in china well she let it
all hang out and
owned up to everything her her opium
addiction the
marriage to sinmei committing adultery
with charles and
having a baby out of wedlock all
commonplace in the 21st century but in
the 1940s
this took the word scandal to a whole
new level
there was always a boatload of
detractors sniping away at emily
conservatives that couldn't stand her
for obvious reasons
but all the controversies did wonders
for book sales and
made emily a very in-demand guest on
radio shows as well as
newspaper and magazine interviews china
to me
was a huge sensation when it was
published in the fall of 1944 and sold
over 700
000 copies she didn't make any friends
among leftists
emily had nothing good to say about the
chinese communists and
leftists in general and later on after
japan's surrender and in the midst of
the chinese civil war
she was a solid supporter of the
nationalists
she went from all those years of
hardship in shanghai
and hong kong to an 11 room townhouse in
manhattan
flush with royalties that had
accumulated over the years
financially she was doing great but all
that hard living
the bombing the starvation rations
during 1942 and 43
well physically she was a wreck and she
had a number of serious health scares
and all the while ever since the moment
she left charles in hong kong in 1943
emily had no idea if he was dead or
alive
she'd hear rumors the japanese shot him
or
he had died of disease and then she'd
get worried that someone had recently
seen him alive
sinmei had contacted her around this
time he had managed to survive the
occupation which
was starting to wind down he would
remain in china and
died in 1968 in poverty after
years of suffering one mass campaign
after another
and trying to kick his lifelong drug
habit
september 4th 1945 emily finally
got word charles had survived and was
recovering in hong kong after being
liberated from an internment camp at
guangzhou
in november of that year the hong kong
government formally recognized emily
hahn for her gallant sacrifice and
risking her life
to bring food and other necessities to
occupants in the pow and
internment camps during the occupation
charles had survived surely thanks to
his fluency and
scholarship of japanese and the stoicism
with which he resigned himself to his
fate
i guess now the japanese they just they
just couldn't bring themselves to kill
him
so happy ending november 22nd
1945 charles flew to new york
and was reunited with emily and their
daughter life magazine did a whole big
spread on the happy family who would all
survive such a devastating time during
the war
less than a week later emily and charles
married up in the state of connecticut
she continued her writing and was very
prolific during this
post-war period she was one of the go-to
journalists for anything related to
china
the civil war and as an eyewitness to
the horrors that visited china during
the
30s and 40s she turned out one
china-related book after another
and also books not about china if you
remember cnn's mike chinoy after
tiananmen
june 4th 1989 well anything that
concerned china he was
for a while the walter cronkite of
china-related news
you know back then you didn't have all
these
bill bishops and david mosers and evan
feigenbaums and kaiser guards who had
such understanding and insight about
china
well in the usa in any case on a
national level
1940s we were only just beginning to get
acquainted with china so you had to
start somewhere
and writers like emily han played their
part
end of july 1946 emily and charles moved
to england
he had inherited a 48-acre estate and
was offered a professorship at the
university of london
their second child amanda was born on
october 20th 1948
emily was 44. early 1950
this storybook marriage started to show
some strain
and they had to get creative about how
to save it after all they had gone
through together
well they couldn't just end it emily
went back to new york and continued to
write for the new yorker
charles remained in london and continued
his teaching
and emily mickey han she kept on writing
for the new yorker pretty much until the
day
she died harold ross william shawn
robert gottlieb tina brown she worked
for all of them
these years from 1950 to 1970
were her most prolific she was a legend
at the new yorker
a permanent fixture in her tiny modest
office near the elevator
she wrote 181 articles for them between
1929 and 1996
because of all her well-documented
experiences there and for some of the
work she left behind
people in the states back then
associated with her with china
she had been the gateway to china for so
many
ordinary and darcy extraordinary
american people
late 1996 emily had a bad fall in her
apartment
91 years old i guess so many of us know
from our own personal
family experiences well for the elderly
that's usually the beginning of the end
after another serious fall
she never recovered and died on february
1997. her daughter corolla was at her
bedside
92 1905 to 1997. that's a heck of a run
if you ask me
as for her beloved charles boxer
well if you check his wikipedia entry it
states he was quote
a historian of dutch and portuguese
maritime and colonial history
in hong kong he was the chief spy of
british army intelligence in the
tumultuous years leading up to world war
ii but it is his lead role in one of the
most flamboyant
public love stories of the 1940s his
romance with emily hahn
author and one of the new yorkers most
prolific contributors
that accounts for most of his fame end
quote
emily mickey han well she didn't make
any chinese history but she sure did
live through some
august to november 1937 in shanghai
1939 in chongqing 1940-43
hong kong plenty of other foreigners
lived through all that too
but emily han was remembered as one of
the more
articulate and approachable writers of
that time and she gave her readership a
nicely unvarnished look at what was
happening
during these most difficult years and
she did it with a style all her own
and emily lives on as an inspiration
to anyone woman or man who wants to
seize the day and go out into the world
and
live by their own rules i'll have links
to some of her work as well as the
books i've mentioned in this episode i
was talking to
graham earnshaw the other night earnshaw
books recently published american
socialite ruth day's
limited edition book with her
descriptions of shanghai during the
weeks
she spent there in 1935.
def first-hand accounts i'll have a link
to that in the show notes as well
shanghai 1935. earnshaw books my
good-looking listeners
books about china and occasionally
beyond
well next time when we convene i will be
going way way back
to tiempos antiguos and we'll look at
someone pretty pretty important in his
time
sort of glossed over him in past
episodes okay i already pitched you
about patreon at the outset no need to
mention that a second time here
this is laszlo montgomery signing off
from smokey la
wishing you all the very best i'm so
appreciative that you all fit me into
your life
so much other great stuff out there okay
come back again in two weeks for what's
sure to be
another exciting episode of the china
history podcast